The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear. And the oldest and strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown.
The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents.
That is not dead which can eternal lie And with strange aeons even death may die.
Searchers after horror haunt strange, far places.
Almost nobody dances sober, unless they happen to be insane.
To the scientist there is the joy in pursuing truth which nearly counteracts the depressing revelations of truth.
Ocean is more ancient than the mountains, and freighted with the memories and the dreams of Time.
Blue, green, grey, white, or black; smooth, ruffled, or mountainous; that ocean is not silent.
What a man does for pay is of little significance. What he is, as a sensitive instrument responsive to the world's beauty, is everything!
It is only the inferior thinker who hastens to explain the singular and the complex by the primitive shortcut of supernaturalism.
I have looked upon all the universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me.
Our means of receiving impressions are absurdly few, and our notions of surrounding objects infinitely narrow. We see things only as we are constru
cted to see them, and can gain no idea of their absolute nature. With five feeble senses we pretend to comprehend the boundlessly complex cosmos.
Men of broader intellect know that there is no sharp distinction betwixt the real and the unreal; that all things appear as they do only by virtue
of the delicate individual physical and mental media through which we are made conscious of them; but the prosaic materialism of the majority conde
mns as madness the flashes of super-sight which penetrate the common veil of obvious empiricism.
My opinion of my whole experience varies from time to time. In broad daylight, and at most seasons I am apt to think the greater part of it a mere
dream; but sometimes in the autumn, about two in the morning when winds and animals howl dismally, there comes from inconceivable depths below a da
mnable suggestions of rhythmical throbbing...
Sometimes I believe that this less material life is our truer life, and that our vain presence on the terraqueous globe is itself the secondary or
merely virtual phenomenon.
I screamed aloud that I was not afraid; that I never could be afraid; and others screamed with me for solace. We swore to one another that the city
 was exactly the same, and still alive...
Life is a hideous thing, and from the background behind what we know of it peer daemoniacal hints of truth which make it sometimes a thousandfold m
ore hideous. Science, already oppressive with its shocking revelations, will perhaps be the ultimate exterminator of our human species — if separat
e species we be — for its reserve of unguessed horrors could never be borne by mortal brains if loosed upon the world.
There be those who say that things and places have souls, and there be those who say they have not; I dare not say, myself, but I will tell of The
Street.
There are not many persons who know what wonders are opened to them in the stories and visions of their youth; for when as children we listen and d
ream, we think but half-formed thoughts, and when as men we try to remember, we are dulled and prosaic with the poison of life.
Memories and possibilities are ever more hideous than realities.
Yog-Sothoth knows the gate. Yog-Sothoth is the gate. Yog-Sothoth is the key and guardian of the gate. Past, present, future, all are one in Yog-Sot
hoth. He knows where the Old Ones broke through of old, and where They shall break through again.
It was an All-in-One and One-in-All of limitless being and self — not merely a thing of one Space-Time continuum, but allied to the ultimate animat
ing essence of existence's whole unbounded sweep — the last, utter sweep which has no confines and which outreaches fancy and mathematics alike.
I took opium but once — in the year of the plague, when doctors sought to deaden the agonies they could not cure. There was an overdose — my physic
ian was worn out with horror and exertion — and I travelled very far indeed. In the end I returned and lived, but my nights are filled with strange
 memories, nor have I ever permitted a doctor to give me opium again.
Slowly but inexorably crawling upon my consciousness and rising above every other impression, came a dizzying fear of the unknown; a fear all the g
reater because I could not analyse it, and seeming to concern a stealthily approaching menace; not death, but some nameless, unheard-of thing inexp
ressibly more ghastly and abhorrent.
I felt that some horrible scene or object lurked beyond the silk-hung walls, and shrank from glancing through the arched, latticed windows that ope
ned so bewilderingly on every hand.
There now ensued a series of incidents which transported me to the opposite extremes of ecstasy and horror; incidents which I tremble to recall and
 dare not seek to interpret.
 Then in a tone of silver it addressed me: "It is the end. They have come down through the gloaming from the stars. Now all is over, and beyond the
 Arinurian streams we shall dwell blissfully in Teloe."
Atop the tallest of earth's peaks dwell the gods of earth, and suffer not man to tell that he hath looked upon them.
The moon is dark, and the gods dance in the night; there is terror in the sky, for upon the moon hath sunk an eclipse foretold in no books of men o
r of earth's gods...'
The other gods! The other gods! The gods of the outer hells that guard the feeble gods of earth!... Look away... Go back... Do not see! Do not see!
May the merciful gods, if indeed there be such, guard those hours when no power of the will, or drug that the cunning of man devises, can keep me f
rom the chasm of sleep. Death is merciful, for there is no return therefrom, but with him who has come back out of the nethermost chambers of night
, haggard and knowing, peace rests nevermore.
Among the agonies of these after days is that chief of torments — inarticulateness. What I learned and saw in those hours of impious exploration ca
n never be told — for want of symbols or suggestions in any language.
That was the end of our voluntary searchings in the caverns of dream. Awed, shaken, and portentous, my friend who had been beyond the barrier warne
d me that we must never venture within those realms again.
From even the greatest of horrors irony is seldom absent.
The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island of igno
rance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far.
It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare note
s.
No recognised school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and green
ish surface of unplaceable stone.
"Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn." … "In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming." .
West of Arkham the hills rise wild, and there are valleys with deep woods that no axe has ever cut. There are dark narrow glens where the trees slo
pe fantastically, and where thin brooklets trickle without ever having caught the glint of sunlight.
It is not because of anything that can be seen or heard or handled, but because of something that is imagined. The place is not good for imaginatio
n, and does not bring restful dreams at night.